---
title: Getting The Most of Your Battery
layout: post
aggregatelimit: 4
unusedtags: workflow computing portability testing
---

For some reason I've always been fascinated on how to get the most out of the technology at my disposal and that has included computing in terms of sheer computing power as well as battery longevity when I finally started owning laptops. I have put together this test to see what is the best program to use for writing articles when it comes to pushing the usable time I can get out of my computer. <!--excerpt-->The machine I currently have that I am running my test on is a 2014 Thinkpad Yoga S1. One thing I noticed was that balanced mode on the computer gave wildly inconsistent power readings from 5 hours down to 2 hours so I did all of my tests in power saving mode. The programs I am testing with are Google docs on Google Chrome, Google Docs on Microsoft Edge, Microsoft Onenote UWP, Microsoft Notepad, and Microsoft Word. In each of these tests, the reports are being written manually while testing. Sometimes you will not have results until finishing the paragraph. Don’t worry, the order in which you put the results should not significantly affect the readings. Also, all calculations were done on a separate device so that it would be a word processor comparison only. Now, on to testing:

We are testing under the following conditions: Power save mode, WiFi on, BT on, keyboard backlight off, Brightness at 10% using the Edge browser with a single tab open. When we started, the battery life was at 92% and so we will be typing until the battery life drops a percentage so that the battery meter will give us an updated estimated battery life. Doing it this way, gives an estimated battery life of 7hrs and 7 mins at 92% battery life. The battery capacity of this laptop is just under 40Whr. Doing the calculation of 40.92 / 7.11 hr gives u a rate of 5.18W The next test will be using the chrome browser. 
We are testing under the following conditions: Power save mode, WiFi on, BT on, keyboard backlight off, Brightness at 10% using the Chrome browser with a single tab open. When we started, the battery life was at 90% and so we will be typing until the battery life drops a percentage so that it will give us an updated estimated battery life. Doing it this way gives an estimated battery life of 5hrs and 39 mins at 89% battery life. The battery capacity of this laptop is just under 40 Whr. Doing the calculation of 40.89 / 5.65 hr gives us a rate of 6.3 W. The next test will be done using the Chrome browser offline.
We are testing under the following conditions: Power save mode, WiFi off, BT off, keyboard backlight off, Brightness at 10% using the Chrome browser with a single tab open. When we started, the battery life was at 88% and so we will be typing until the battery life drops a percentage so that the battery meter will give an updated estimated battery life. Doing it this way gives an estimated battery life of 6hrs and 49 mins at 87% battery life. The battery capacity of this laptop is just under 40 Whr. Doing the calculation of 40.87 / 6.817 hr gives us a rate of 5.11W.
The way this looks is that Edge is best for doing Google docs work while online and Chrome is best for doing Google Docs work offline as offline mode is not present with the Edge browser.
We will be running one more test with the chrome browser while online.
We are testing under the following conditions: Power save mode, WiFi on, BT on, keyboard backlight off, Brightness at 10% using the Chrome browser with a single tab open. When we started, the battery life was at 86% and so we will be typing until the battery life drops a percentage point so that it will give an updated estimated battery life. Doing it this way gives an estimated battery life of 4 hours and 56 minutes at 85% battery life. The battery capacity of this laptop is just under 40Whr. Doing the calculation of 40.85 / 4.933 gives us a rate of 6.89W.
Just for comparison’s sake, we will be running the same test using Windows UWP Onenote offline.
We are testing under the following conditions: Power save mode, WiFi off, BT off, keyboard backlight off, Brightness at 10% using Microsoft Onenote UWP. When we started, the battery life was at 84% and so we will be typing until the battery life drops a percentage so that the battery meter will give an updated estimated battery life. Doing it this way gives an estimated battery life of 7 hrs and 23 mins at 83% battery life. The battery capacity of this laptop is just under 40 Whr. Doing the calculation of 40.83/7.383 gives us a rate of 4.497W.
When all these tests were conducted, Keepass 2 and Google's backup and sync were running. Ultimately, the best battery life is achieved by an offline word processor like Windows UWP Onenote. One more test to conduct will be to do so using notepad.
We are testing under the following conditions: Power save mode, WiFi off, BT off, keyboard backlight off, Brightness at 10% using Microsoft Notepad. When we started, the battery life was at 83% and so we will be typing until the battery life drops a percentage so that the battery meter will give an updated estimated battery life. Doing it this way gives an estimated battery life of 8 hrs and 39 mins at 82% battery life. The battery capacity of this laptop is just under 40 Whr. Doing the calculation of 40.82/8.65 gives us a rate of 3.792W. 
We are testing under the following conditions: Power save mode, WiFi off, BT off, keyboard backlight off, Brightness at 10% using Microsoft Word. When we started, the battery life was at 79% and so we will be typing until the battery life drops a percentage so that the battery meter will give an updated estimated battery life. Doing it this way gives an estimated battery life of 7 hrs and 03 mins at 78% battery life. The battery capacity of this laptop is just under 40 Whr. Doing the calculation of 40.78/7.05 gives us a rate of 4.42W

If we really wanted to stretch the endurance of the laptop, we would use an ultra barebones program like notepad to ge our work done. Sadly, this only really works with writing documents as doing increased calculations with say a spreadsheet or image processing will require more energy than reflecting ASCII keys on a white background. It seems that using a 4th gen intel i7 u processor is not as power efficient as an arm processor for note taking and document creation. Given that a program like Microsoft Word or Onenote is a good balance of convenience and power efficiency, those will be the programs I use for document creation on my laptop. If you wish to use this testing methodology to test the power consumption of your programs, please credit Jatomis Stevenson as the originator of this test.